README.md, before:

CALIBRATOR (0.6.0 version)
===========================

A software to perform calibrations or optimizations of empirical parameters.

AUTHORS
-------

* Javier Burguete Tolosa (jburguete@eead.csic.es)
* Borja Latorre Garcés (borja.latorre@csic.es)

REQUIRED
--------

* mpicc, gcc or clang (to compile the source code)
* make (to build the executable file)
* autoconf (to generate the Makefile in different operative systems)
* automake (to check the operative system)
* pkg-config (to find the libraries to compile)
* gsl (to generate random numbers)
* libxml (to deal with XML files)
* gthreads (to use multicores in shared memory machines)
* glib (extended utilities of C to work with data, lists, mapped files, regular
	expressions, ...)
* [genetic](https://github.com/jburguete/genetic) (genetic algorithm)
* openmpi or mpich (optional: to run in parallelized tasks)
* doxygen (optional: standard comments format to generate documentation)
* latex (optional: to build the PDF manuals)

FILES
-----

* configure.ac: configure generator.
* Makefile.in: Makefile generator.
* config.h.in: config header generator.
* calibrator.c: source code.
* Doxyfile: configuration file to generate doxygen documentation.
* TODO: tasks to do.
* README.md: this file.
* tests/testX/*: several tests to check the program working.

BUILDING INSTRUCTIONS
---------------------

This software has been built and tested in the following operative systems.
Probably, it can be built in other systems, distributions, or versions but it
has not been tested.

Debian Linux 8.0
________________
Debian kFreeBSD 8.0
___________________
DragonFly BSD 4.0.5
___________________
FreeBSD 10.1
____________
NetBSD 6.1.5
____________

1. Download the latest [genetic](https://github.com/jburguete/genetic) doing on
a terminal:
> $ git clone https://github.com/jburguete/genetic.git

2. Download this repository:
> $ git clone https://github.com/jburguete/calibrator.git

3. Link the latest genetic version to genetic:
> $ cd calibrator/0.6.0
>
> $ ln -s ../../genetic/0.6.1 genetic

4. Build doing on a terminal:
> $ cd calibrator/0.6.0
>
> $ aclocal
>
> $ autoconf
>
> $ automake --add-missing
>
> $ ./configure
>
> $ make

OpenBSD 5.7
___________

1. Select adequate versions:
> $ export AUTOCONF_VERSION=2.69 AUTOMAKE_VERSION=1.15

2. Then, in a MSYS2 terminal, follow steps 1 to 4 of the previous Debian Linux

Microsoft Windows 7 (with MSYS2)
________________________________
Microsoft Windows 8.1 (with MSYS2)
__________________________________

1. Install [MSYS2](http://sourceforge.net/projects/msys2) and the required
libraries and utilities. You can follow detailed instructions in
[install-unix]
(https://github.com/jburguete/install-unix/blob/master/tutorial.pdf)

2. Then, in a MSYS2 terminal, follow steps 1 to 4 of the previous Debian Linux
8.0 section.

MAKING REFERENCE MANUAL INSTRUCTIONS (file latex/refman.pdf)
------------------------------------------------------------

On UNIX type systems you need [texlive](https://www.tug.org/texlive) installed.
On Windows systems you need [MiKTeX](http://miktex.org). Then do in a terminal:

> $ cd calibrator/0.6.0
>
> $ doxygen
>
> $ cd latex
>
> $ make

USER INSTRUCTIONS
-----------------

* Command line in sequential mode:
> $ ./calibrator [-nthreads X] input_file.xml

* Command line in parallelized mode (where X is the number of threads to open in
every node):
> $ mpirun [MPI options] ./calibrator [-nthreads X] input_file.xml

* The syntax of the simulator has to be:
> $ ./simulator_name input_file_1 [input_file_2] [input_file_3] [input_file_4] output_file

* The syntax of the program to evaluate the objetive function has to be (where
the first data in the results file has to be the objective function value):
> $ ./evaluator_name simulated_file data_file results_file

INPUT FILE FORMAT
-----------------

    <?xml version="1.0"/>
    <calibrate simulator="simulator_name" evaluator="evaluator_name" algorithm="algorithm_type" nsimulations="simulations_number" niterations="iterations_number" tolerance="tolerance_value" nbest="best_number" npopulation="population_number" ngenerations="generations_number" mutation="mutation_ratio" reproduction="reproduction_ratio" adaptation="adaptation_ratio">
        <experiment name="data_file_1" template1="template_1_1" template2="template_1_2" .../>
        ...
        <experiment name="data_file_N" template1="template_N_1" template2="template_N_2" .../>
        <variable name="variable_1" minimum="min_value" maximum="max_value" format="c_string_format" sweeps="sweeps_number" nbits="bits_number"/>
        ...
        <variable name="variable_M" minimum="min_value" maximum="max_value" format="c_string_format" sweeps="sweeps_number" nbits="bits_number"/>
    </calibrate>

Implemented algorithms are:

* *"sweep"*: Sweep brutal force algorithm. Requires for each variable:
> sweeps: number of sweeps to generate for each variable in every experiment. 

  The total number of simulations to run is:
> (number of experiments) x (variable 1 number of sweeps) x ... x
> (variable n number of sweeps) x (number of iterations)

* *"Monte-Carlo"*: Monte-Carlo brutal force algorithm. Requires on calibrate:
> nsimulations: number of simulations to run in every experiment.

  The total number of simulations to run is:
> (number of experiments) x (number of simulations) x (number of iterations)

* Both brutal force algorithms can be iterated to improve convergence by using
the following parameters:
> nbest: number of best simulations to calculate convergence interval on next
> iteration (default 1).
>
> tolerance: tolerance parameter to increase convergence interval (default 0).
>
> niterations: number of iterations (default 1).

* *"genetic"*: Genetic algorithm. Requires the following parameters:
> npopulation: number of population.
>
> ngenerations: number of generations.
>
> mutation: mutation ratio.
>
> reproduction: reproduction ratio.
>
> adaptation: adaptation ratio.

  and for each variable:
> nbits: number of bits to encode each variable.

  The total number of simulations to run is:
> (number of experiments) x (npopulation) x [1 + (ngenerations - 1)
> x (mutation + reproduction + adaptation)]

SOME EXAMPLES OF INPUT FILES
----------------------------

Example 1
_________

* The simulator program name is: *pivot*
* The syntax is:
> $ ./pivot input_file output_file

* The program to evaluate the objective function is: *compare*
* The syntax is:
> $ ./compare simulated_file data_file result_file

* The calibration is performed with a *sweep brutal force algorithm*.

* The experimental data files are:
> 27-48.txt
>
> 42.txt
>
> 52.txt
>
> 100.txt

* Templates to get input files to simulator for each experiment are:
> template1.js
>
> template2.js
>
> template3.js
>
> template4.js

* The variables to calibrate, ranges, c-string format and sweeps number to perform are:
> alpha1, [179.70, 180.20], %.2lf, 5
>
> alpha2, [179.30, 179.60], %.2lf, 5
>
> random, [0.00, 0.20], %.2lf, 5
>
> boot-time, [0.0, 3.0], %.1lf, 5

* Then, the number of simulations to run is: 4x5x5x5x5=2500.

* The input file is:

_

    <?xml version="1.0"?>
    <calibrate simulator="pivot" evaluator="compare" algorithm="sweep">
        <experiment name="27-48.txt" template1="template1.js"/>
        <experiment name="42.txt" template1="template2.js"/>
        <experiment name="52.txt" template1="template3.js"/>
        <experiment name="100.txt" template1="template4.js"/>
        <variable name="alpha1" minimum="179.70" maximum="180.20" format="%.2lf" nsweeps="5"/>
        <variable name="alpha2" minimum="179.30" maximum="179.60" format="%.2lf" nsweeps="5"/>
        <variable name="random" minimum="0.00" maximum="0.20" format="%.2lf" nsweeps="5"/>
        <variable name="boot-time" minimum="0.0" maximum="3.0" format="%.1lf" nsweeps="5"/>
    </calibrate>


* A template file as *template1.js*:

_

    {
      "towers" :
      [
        {
          "length"      : 50.11,
          "velocity"    : 0.02738,
          "@variable1@" : @value1@,
          "@variable2@" : @value2@,
          "@variable3@" : @value3@,
          "@variable4@" : @value4@
        },
        {
          "length"    : 50.11,
          "velocity"  : 0.02824,
          "@variable1@" : @value1@,
          "@variable2@" : @value2@,
          "@variable3@" : @value3@,
          "@variable4@" : @value4@
        },
        {
          "length"    : 50.11,
          "velocity"  : 0.03008,
          "@variable1@" : @value1@,
          "@variable2@" : @value2@,
          "@variable3@" : @value3@,
          "@variable4@" : @value4@
        },
        {
          "length"    : 50.11,
          "velocity"  : 0.03753,
          "@variable1@" : @value1@,
          "@variable2@" : @value2@,
          "@variable3@" : @value3@,
          "@variable4@" : @value4@
        }
      ],
      "cycle-time"     : 71.0,
      "plot-time"     : 1.0,
      "comp-time-step": 0.1,
      "active-percent" : 27.48
    }

* Produce simulator input files to reproduce the experimental data file
*27-48.txt* as:

_

    {
      "towers" :
      [
        {
          "length"      : 50.11,
          "velocity"    : 0.02738,
          "alpha1" : 179.95,
          "alpha2" : 179.45,
          "random" : 0.10,
          "boot-time" : 1.5
        },
        {
          "length"    : 50.11,
          "velocity"  : 0.02824,
          "alpha1" : 179.95,
          "alpha2" : 179.45,
          "random" : 0.10,
          "boot-time" : 1.5
        },
        {
          "length"    : 50.11,
          "velocity"  : 0.03008,
          "alpha1" : 179.95,
          "alpha2" : 179.45,
          "random" : 0.10,
          "boot-time" : 1.5
        },
        {
          "length"    : 50.11,
          "velocity"  : 0.03753,
          "alpha1" : 179.95,
          "alpha2" : 179.45,
          "random" : 0.10,
          "boot-time" : 1.5
        }
      ],
      "cycle-time"     : 71.0,
      "plot-time"     : 1.0,
      "comp-time-step": 0.1,
      "active-percent" : 27.48
    }

Commit message:

Adding weights to the objective values for every experiment

README.md, after:

CALIBRATOR (0.8.0 version)
===========================

A software to perform calibrations or optimizations of empirical parameters.

AUTHORS
-------

* Javier Burguete Tolosa (jburguete@eead.csic.es)
* Borja Latorre Garcés (borja.latorre@csic.es)

REQUIRED
--------

* mpicc, gcc or clang (to compile the source code)
* make (to build the executable file)
* autoconf (to generate the Makefile in different operative systems)
* automake (to check the operative system)
* pkg-config (to find the libraries to compile)
* gsl (to generate random numbers)
* libxml (to deal with XML files)
* gthreads (to use multicores in shared memory machines)
* glib (extended utilities of C to work with data, lists, mapped files, regular
	expressions, ...)
* [genetic](https://github.com/jburguete/genetic) (genetic algorithm)
* openmpi or mpich (optional: to run in parallelized tasks)
* doxygen (optional: standard comments format to generate documentation)
* latex (optional: to build the PDF manuals)

FILES
-----

* configure.ac: configure generator.
* Makefile.in: Makefile generator.
* config.h.in: config header generator.
* calibrator.c: source code.
* Doxyfile: configuration file to generate doxygen documentation.
* TODO: tasks to do.
* README.md: this file.
* tests/testX/*: several tests to check the program working.

BUILDING INSTRUCTIONS
---------------------

This software has been built and tested in the following operative systems.
Probably, it can be built in other systems, distributions, or versions but it
has not been tested.

Debian Linux 8.0
________________
Debian kFreeBSD 8.0
___________________
DragonFly BSD 4.0.5
___________________
FreeBSD 10.1
____________
NetBSD 6.1.5
____________

1. Download the latest [genetic](https://github.com/jburguete/genetic) doing on
a terminal:
> $ git clone https://github.com/jburguete/genetic.git

2. Download this repository:
> $ git clone https://github.com/jburguete/calibrator.git

3. Link the latest genetic version to genetic:
> $ cd calibrator/0.8.0
>
> $ ln -s ../../genetic/0.6.1 genetic

4. Build doing on a terminal:
> $ cd calibrator/0.8.0
>
> $ aclocal
>
> $ autoconf
>
> $ automake --add-missing
>
> $ ./configure
>
> $ make

OpenBSD 5.7
___________

1. Select adequate versions:
> $ export AUTOCONF_VERSION=2.69 AUTOMAKE_VERSION=1.15

2. Then, in a MSYS2 terminal, follow steps 1 to 4 of the previous Debian Linux

Microsoft Windows 7 (with MSYS2)
________________________________
Microsoft Windows 8.1 (with MSYS2)
__________________________________

1. Install [MSYS2](http://sourceforge.net/projects/msys2) and the required
libraries and utilities. You can follow detailed instructions in
[install-unix]
(https://github.com/jburguete/install-unix/blob/master/tutorial.pdf)

2. Then, in a MSYS2 terminal, follow steps 1 to 4 of the previous Debian Linux
8.0 section.

MAKING REFERENCE MANUAL INSTRUCTIONS (file latex/refman.pdf)
------------------------------------------------------------

On UNIX type systems you need [texlive](https://www.tug.org/texlive) installed.
On Windows systems you need [MiKTeX](http://miktex.org). Then do in a terminal:

> $ cd calibrator/0.8.0
>
> $ doxygen
>
> $ cd latex
>
> $ make

USER INSTRUCTIONS
-----------------

* Command line in sequential mode:
> $ ./calibrator [-nthreads X] input_file.xml

* Command line in parallelized mode (where X is the number of threads to open in
every node):
> $ mpirun [MPI options] ./calibrator [-nthreads X] input_file.xml

* The syntax of the simulator has to be:
> $ ./simulator_name input_file_1 [input_file_2] [input_file_3] [input_file_4] output_file

* The syntax of the program to evaluate the objetive function has to be (where
the first data in the results file has to be the objective function value):
> $ ./evaluator_name simulated_file data_file results_file

INPUT FILE FORMAT
-----------------

    <?xml version="1.0"/>
    <calibrate simulator="simulator_name" evaluator="evaluator_name" algorithm="algorithm_type" nsimulations="simulations_number" niterations="iterations_number" tolerance="tolerance_value" nbest="best_number" npopulation="population_number" ngenerations="generations_number" mutation="mutation_ratio" reproduction="reproduction_ratio" adaptation="adaptation_ratio">
        <experiment name="data_file_1" template1="template_1_1" template2="template_1_2" ... weight="weight_1"/>
        ...
        <experiment name="data_file_N" template1="template_N_1" template2="template_N_2" ... weight="weight_N"/>
        <variable name="variable_1" minimum="min_value" maximum="max_value" format="c_string_format" sweeps="sweeps_number" nbits="bits_number"/>
        ...
        <variable name="variable_M" minimum="min_value" maximum="max_value" format="c_string_format" sweeps="sweeps_number" nbits="bits_number"/>
    </calibrate>

* *"weight"* associated to every experiment multiplies the objective value
obtained for every experiment in the final objective function value.

Implemented algorithms are:

* *"sweep"*: Sweep brutal force algorithm. Requires for each variable:
> sweeps: number of sweeps to generate for each variable in every experiment. 

  The total number of simulations to run is:
> (number of experiments) x (variable 1 number of sweeps) x ... x
> (variable n number of sweeps) x (number of iterations)

* *"Monte-Carlo"*: Monte-Carlo brutal force algorithm. Requires on calibrate:
> nsimulations: number of simulations to run in every experiment.

  The total number of simulations to run is:
> (number of experiments) x (number of simulations) x (number of iterations)

* Both brutal force algorithms can be iterated to improve convergence by using
the following parameters:
> nbest: number of best simulations to calculate convergence interval on next
> iteration (default 1).
>
> tolerance: tolerance parameter to increase convergence interval (default 0).
>
> niterations: number of iterations (default 1).

* *"genetic"*: Genetic algorithm. Requires the following parameters:
> npopulation: number of population.
>
> ngenerations: number of generations.
>
> mutation: mutation ratio.
>
> reproduction: reproduction ratio.
>
> adaptation: adaptation ratio.

  and for each variable:
> nbits: number of bits to encode each variable.

  The total number of simulations to run is:
> (number of experiments) x (npopulation) x [1 + (ngenerations - 1)
> x (mutation + reproduction + adaptation)]

SOME EXAMPLES OF INPUT FILES
----------------------------

Example 1
_________

* The simulator program name is: *pivot*
* The syntax is:
> $ ./pivot input_file output_file

* The program to evaluate the objective function is: *compare*
* The syntax is:
> $ ./compare simulated_file data_file result_file

* The calibration is performed with a *sweep brutal force algorithm*.

* The experimental data files are:
> 27-48.txt
>
> 42.txt
>
> 52.txt
>
> 100.txt

* Templates to get input files to simulator for each experiment are:
> template1.js
>
> template2.js
>
> template3.js
>
> template4.js

* The variables to calibrate, ranges, c-string format and sweeps number to perform are:
> alpha1, [179.70, 180.20], %.2lf, 5
>
> alpha2, [179.30, 179.60], %.2lf, 5
>
> random, [0.00, 0.20], %.2lf, 5
>
> boot-time, [0.0, 3.0], %.1lf, 5

* Then, the number of simulations to run is: 4x5x5x5x5=2500.

* The input file is:

_

    <?xml version="1.0"?>
    <calibrate simulator="pivot" evaluator="compare" algorithm="sweep">
        <experiment name="27-48.txt" template1="template1.js"/>
        <experiment name="42.txt" template1="template2.js"/>
        <experiment name="52.txt" template1="template3.js"/>
        <experiment name="100.txt" template1="template4.js"/>
        <variable name="alpha1" minimum="179.70" maximum="180.20" format="%.2lf" nsweeps="5"/>
        <variable name="alpha2" minimum="179.30" maximum="179.60" format="%.2lf" nsweeps="5"/>
        <variable name="random" minimum="0.00" maximum="0.20" format="%.2lf" nsweeps="5"/>
        <variable name="boot-time" minimum="0.0" maximum="3.0" format="%.1lf" nsweeps="5"/>
    </calibrate>


* A template file as *template1.js*:

_

    {
      "towers" :
      [
        {
          "length"      : 50.11,
          "velocity"    : 0.02738,
          "@variable1@" : @value1@,
          "@variable2@" : @value2@,
          "@variable3@" : @value3@,
          "@variable4@" : @value4@
        },
        {
          "length"    : 50.11,
          "velocity"  : 0.02824,
          "@variable1@" : @value1@,
          "@variable2@" : @value2@,
          "@variable3@" : @value3@,
          "@variable4@" : @value4@
        },
        {
          "length"    : 50.11,
          "velocity"  : 0.03008,
          "@variable1@" : @value1@,
          "@variable2@" : @value2@,
          "@variable3@" : @value3@,
          "@variable4@" : @value4@
        },
        {
          "length"    : 50.11,
          "velocity"  : 0.03753,
          "@variable1@" : @value1@,
          "@variable2@" : @value2@,
          "@variable3@" : @value3@,
          "@variable4@" : @value4@
        }
      ],
      "cycle-time"     : 71.0,
      "plot-time"     : 1.0,
      "comp-time-step": 0.1,
      "active-percent" : 27.48
    }

* Produce simulator input files to reproduce the experimental data file
*27-48.txt* as:

_

    {
      "towers" :
      [
        {
          "length"      : 50.11,
          "velocity"    : 0.02738,
          "alpha1" : 179.95,
          "alpha2" : 179.45,
          "random" : 0.10,
          "boot-time" : 1.5
        },
        {
          "length"    : 50.11,
          "velocity"  : 0.02824,
          "alpha1" : 179.95,
          "alpha2" : 179.45,
          "random" : 0.10,
          "boot-time" : 1.5
        },
        {
          "length"    : 50.11,
          "velocity"  : 0.03008,
          "alpha1" : 179.95,
          "alpha2" : 179.45,
          "random" : 0.10,
          "boot-time" : 1.5
        },
        {
          "length"    : 50.11,
          "velocity"  : 0.03753,
          "alpha1" : 179.95,
          "alpha2" : 179.45,
          "random" : 0.10,
          "boot-time" : 1.5
        }
      ],
      "cycle-time"     : 71.0,
      "plot-time"     : 1.0,
      "comp-time-step": 0.1,
      "active-percent" : 27.48
    }
