3.4.5/README.md, before:

MPCOTool
========

The Multi-Purposes Calibration and Optimization Tool. A software to perform
calibrations or optimizations of empirical parameters.

VERSIONS
--------

* 3.4.5: Stable and recommended version.

AUTHORS
-------

* Javier Burguete Tolosa (jburguete@eead.csic.es)
* Borja Latorre Garcés (borja.latorre@csic.es)

WINDOWS EXECUTABLE FILES
------------------------

This repository contains source and example files with the latest version of 
MPCOTool. Stable versions with executable files and manuals for Microsoft
Windows systems can be downloaded in 
[digital.csic](http://digital.csic.es/handle/10261/148471)

TOOLS AND LIBRARIES REQUIRED TO BUILD THE EXECUTABLE
----------------------------------------------------

* [gcc](https://gcc.gnu.org) or [clang](http://clang.llvm.org) (to compile the
  source code)
* [make](http://www.gnu.org/software/make) (to build the executable file)
* [autoconf](http://www.gnu.org/software/autoconf) (to generate the Makefile in
  different operative systems)
* [automake](http://www.gnu.org/software/automake) (to check the operative
  system)
* [pkg-config](http://www.freedesktop.org/wiki/Software/pkg-config) (to find the
  libraries to compile)
* [gsl](http://www.gnu.org/software/gsl) (to generate random numbers)
* [libxml](http://xmlsoft.org) (to deal with XML files)
* [glib](https://developer.gnome.org/glib) (extended utilities of C to work with
  data, lists, mapped files, regular expressions, using multicores in shared
  memory machines, ...)
* [json-glib](https://github.com/ebassi/json-glib) (to deal with JSON files)
* [genetic](https://github.com/jburguete/genetic) (genetic algorithm)

OPTIONAL TOOLS AND LIBRARIES
----------------------------

* [gettext](http://www.gnu.org/software/gettext) (to work with different
  locales)
* [gtk+3](http://www.gtk.org) (to create the interactive GUI tool)
* [openmpi](http://www.open-mpi.org) or [mpich](http://www.mpich.org) (to run in
  parallelized tasks on multiple computers)
* [doxygen](http://www.stack.nl/~dimitri/doxygen) (standard comments format to
  generate documentation)
* [latex](https://www.latex-project.org/) (to build the PDF manuals)

FILES
-----

The source code has to have the following files:
* 3.4.5/configure.ac: configure generator.
* 3.4.5/Makefile.in: Makefile generator.
* 3.4.5/config.h.in: config header generator.
* 3.4.5/mpcotool.c: main source code.
* 3.4.5/mpcotool.h: main header code.
* 3.4.5/mpcotool.ico: icon file.
* 3.4.5/interface.h: interface header code.
* 3.4.5/build: script to build all.
* 3.4.5/logo.png: logo figure.
* 3.4.5/Doxyfile: configuration file to generate doxygen documentation.
* TODO: tasks to do.
* README.md: this file.
* license.md: license file.
* tests/testX/\*: several tests to check the program working.
* locales/\*/LC\_MESSAGES/mpcotool.po: translation files.
* manuals/\*.eps: manual figures in EPS format.
* manuals/\*.png: manual figures in PNG format.
* manuals/\*.tex: documentation source files.
* applications/\*/\*: several practical application cases.
* check\_errors/\*.xml: several mistaken files to check error handling.

BUILDING INSTRUCTIONS
---------------------

This software has been built and tested in the following operative systems.
Probably, it can be built in other systems, distributions, or versions but it
has not been tested.

Debian 9 (Linux, kFreeBSD or Hurd)
__________________________________
DragonFly BSD 5.2
_________________
Dyson Illumos
_____________
FreeBSD 11.2
____________
Linux Mint DE 2
_______________
Xubuntu Linux 18.10
___________________

1. Download the latest [genetic](https://github.com/jburguete/genetic) doing on
a terminal:
> $ git clone https://github.com/jburguete/genetic.git

2. Download this repository:
> $ git clone https://github.com/jburguete/mpcotool.git

3. Link the latest genetic version to genetic:
> $ cd mpcotool/3.4.5
>
> $ ln -s ../../genetic/2.2.2 genetic
> 
> $ ln -s genetic/libgenetic.so

  or in Windows systems:
> $ ln -s genetic/libgenetic.dll

4. Build doing on a terminal:
> $ ./build

Fedora Linux 29
_______________

1. In order to use OpenMPI compilation do in a terminal (in 64 bits version):
> $ export PATH=$PATH:/usr/lib64/openmpi/bin

2. Then, follow steps 1 to 4 of the previous Debian 9 section.

Microsoft Windows 7
___________________
Microsoft Windows 10
____________________

1. Install [MSYS2](http://sourceforge.net/projects/msys2) and the required
libraries and utilities. You can follow detailed instructions in
[install-unix](https://github.com/jburguete/install-unix/blob/master/tutorial.pdf)

2. Then, in a MSYS2 terminal, follow steps 1 to 4 of the previous Debian 9
section.

3. Optional Windows binary package can be built doing in the terminal:
> $ make windist

NetBSD 7.0
__________

1. MPI does not work. Follow steps 1 to 3 of the previous Debian 9 section and
do in the terminal:
> $ CC=/usr/pkg/gcc5/bin/gcc ./build

OpenBSD 6.4
___________

1. Select adequate versions:
> $ export AUTOCONF_VERSION=2.69 AUTOMAKE_VERSION=1.16

2. Then, in a terminal, follow steps 1 to 4 of the previous Debian 9 section.

OpenIndiana Hipster
___________________

1. In order to use OpenMPI compilation do in a terminal:
> $ export PATH=/usr/lib/openmpi/gcc/bin:$PATH

2. Then, follow steps 1 to 4 of the previous Debian 9 section.

OpenSUSE Linux Leap
___________________

1. In order to use OpenMPI compilation do in a terminal (in 64 bits version):
> $ export PATH=/usr/lib64/mpi/gcc/openmpi/bin:$PATH

2. Then, follow steps 1 to 4 of the previous Debian 9 section.

Building no-GUI version on servers
__________________________________

On servers or clusters, where no-GUI with MPI parallelization is desirable,
replace the 4th step of the previous Debian 9 section by:
> $ ./build\_with\_mpi
 
Linking as an external library
______________________________

MPCOTool can also be used as an external library:

1. First copy the dynamic libraries (libmpcotool.so and libgenetic.so on Unix 
  systems or libmpcotool.dll and libgenetic.dll on Windows systems) to your 
  program directory.

2. Include the function header in your source code:
> extern int mpcotool (int argn, char **argc);

3. Build the executable file with the linker and compiler flags:
> $ gcc -L. -Wl,-rpath=. -lmpcotool -lgenetic ...
> \`pkg-config --cflags --libs gsl glib-2.0 json-glib-1.0 ...\'

4. Calling to this function is equivalent to command line order (see next 
  chapter USER INSTRUCTIONS):
  * argn: number of arguments
  * argc[0]: "mpcotool"
  * argc[1]: first command line argument.

  ...

  * argc[argn-1]: last argument.

MAKING MANUALS INSTRUCTIONS
---------------------------

On UNIX type systems you need [texlive](https://www.tug.org/texlive) installed.
On Windows systems you need [MiKTeX](http://miktex.org). In order to compile the
manuals you can type on a terminal:
> $ make manuals

MAKING TESTS INSTRUCTIONS
-------------------------

In order to build the tests follow the next instructions:

1. Link some tests that needs genetic library doing in a terminal (assuming that
you are in the directory mpcotool/3.4.5):
> $ cd ../tests/test2
>
> $ ln -s ../../../genetic/2.2.2 genetic
>
> $ ln -s genetic/libgenetic.so (or .dll on Windows systems)
>
> $ cd ../test3
>
> $ ln -s ../../../genetic/2.2.2 genetic
>
> $ ln -s genetic/libgenetic.so (or .dll on Windows systems)
>
> $ cd ../test4
>
> $ ln -s ../../../genetic/2.2.2 genetic
>
> $ ln -s genetic/libgenetic.so (or .dll on Windows systems)

2. Build all tests doing in the same terminal:
> $ cd ../../3.4.5
>
> $ make tests

USER INSTRUCTIONS
-----------------

Optional arguments are typed in square brackets.

* Command line in sequential mode (where X is the number of threads to execute
  and S is a seed for the pseudo-random numbers generator):
> $ ./mpcotoolbin [-nthreads X] [-seed S] input\_file.xml [result\_file]
> [variables\_file]

* Command line in parallelized mode (where X is the number of threads to
  open for every node and S is a seed for the pseudo-random numbers generator):
> $ mpirun [MPI options] ./mpcotoolbin [-nthreads X] [-seed S] input\_file.xml
> [result\_file] [variables\_file]

* The syntax of the simulator has to be:
> $ ./simulator\_name input\_file\_1 [input\_file\_2] [input\_file\_3] [input\_file\_4]
> output\_file

* The syntax of the program to evaluate the objetive function has to be (where
  the first data in the results file has to be the objective function value):
> $ ./evaluator\_name simulated\_file data\_file results\_file

* On UNIX type systems the GUI application can be open doing on a terminal:
> $ ./mpcotool

INPUT FILE FORMAT
-----------------

The format of the main input file is as:

```xml
<?xml version="1.0"?>
<optimize simulator="simulator_name" evaluator="evaluator_name" algorithm="algorithm_type" nsimulations="simulations_number" niterations="iterations_number" tolerance="tolerance_value" nbest="best_number" npopulation="population_number" ngenerations="generations_number" mutation="mutation_ratio" reproduction="reproduction_ratio" adaptation="adaptation_ratio" direction="direction_search_type" nsteps="steps_number" relaxation="relaxation_parameter" nestimates="estimates_number" threshold="threshold_parameter" norm="norm_type" p="p_parameter" seed="random_seed" result_file="result_file" variables_file="variables_file">
    <experiment name="data_file_1" template1="template_1_1" template2="template_1_2" ... weight="weight_1"/>
    ...
    <experiment name="data_file_N" template1="template_N_1" template2="template_N_2" ... weight="weight_N"/>
    <variable name="variable_1" minimum="min_value" maximum="max_value" precision="precision_digits" sweeps="sweeps_number" nbits="bits_number" step="step_size"/>
    ...
    <variable name="variable_M" minimum="min_value" maximum="max_value" precision="precision_digits" sweeps="sweeps_number" nbits="bits_number" step="step_size"/>
</optimize>
```

with:

* **simulator**: simulator executable file name.
* **evaluator**: optional. When needed is the evaluator executable file name.
* **seed**: optional. Seed of the pseudo-random numbers generator (default value
  is 7007).
* **result\_file**: optional. It is the name of the optime result file (default 
  name is "result").
* **variables\_file**: optional. It is the name of all simulated variables file
  (default name is "variables").
* **precision**: optional, defined for each variable. Number of precision digits
  to evaluate the variable. 0 apply for integer numbers (default value is 14).
* **weight**: optional, defined for each experiment. Multiplies the objective
  value obtained for each experiment in the final objective function value
  (default value is 1).
* **threshold**: optional, to stop the simulations if objective function value
  less than the threshold is obtained (default value is 0).
* **algorithm**: optimization algorithm type.
* **norm**: error norm type.

Implemented algorithms are:

* **sweep**: Sweep brute force algorithm. It requires for each variable:
  * *sweeps*: number of sweeps to generate for each variable in every
    experiment. 

    The total number of simulations to run is:
> (number of experiments) x (variable 1 number of sweeps) x ... x
> (variable n number of sweeps) x (number of iterations)

* **Monte-Carlo**: Monte-Carlo brute force algorithm. It requires on calibrate:
  * *nsimulations*: number of simulations to run in every experiment.

    The total number of simulations to run is:
> (number of experiments) x (number of simulations) x (number of iterations)

* Both brute force algorithms can be iterated to improve convergence by using
  the following parameters:
  * *nbest*: number of best simulations to calculate convergence interval on
    next iteration (default 1).
  * *tolerance*: tolerance parameter to increase convergence interval (default
    0).
  * *niterations*: number of iterations (default 1).

     It multiplies the total number of simulations:
> x (number of iterations)

* Moreover, both brute force algorithms can be coupled with a direction search
  method by using:
  * *direction*: method to estimate the optimal direction. Two options are
    currently available:
    * coordinates: coordinates descent method.

      It increases the total number of simulations by:
> (number of experiments) x (number of iterations) x (number of steps) x 2
> x (number of variables)
    * random: random method. It requires:
    * nestimates: number of random checks to estimate the optimal direction.

      It increases the total number of simulations by:
> (number of experiments) x (number of iterations) x (number of steps)
> x (number of estimates)

  Both methods require also:
    * nsteps: number of steps to perform the direction search method,
    * relaxation: relaxation parameter,

  and for each variable:
    * step: initial step size for the direction search method.

* **genetic**: Genetic algorithm. It requires the following parameters:
  * *npopulation*: number of population.
  * *ngenerations*: number of generations.
  * *mutation*: mutation ratio.
  * *reproduction*: reproduction ratio.
  * *adaptation*: adaptation ratio.

  and for each variable:

  * *nbits*: number of bits to encode each variable.

  The total number of simulations to run is:
> (number of experiments) x (npopulation) x [1 + (ngenerations - 1)
> x (mutation + reproduction + adaptation)]

Implemented error noms are:

* **euclidian**: Euclidian norm.
* **maximum**: maximum norm.
* **p**: p-norm. It requires the parameter:
  * *p*: p exponent.
* **taxicab**: Taxicab norm.

Alternatively, the input file can be also written in JSON format as:

```json
{
	"simulator": "simulator_name",
	"evaluator": "evaluator_name",
	"algorithm": "algorithm_type",
	"nsimulations": "simulations_number",
	"niterations": "iterations_number",
	"tolerance": "tolerance_value",
	"nbest": "best_number",
	"npopulation": "population_number",
	"ngenerations": "generations_number",
	"mutation": "mutation_ratio",
	"reproduction": "reproduction_ratio",
	"adaptation": "adaptation_ratio",
	"direction": "direction_search_type",
	"nsteps": "steps_number",
	"relaxation": "relaxation_parameter",
	"nestimates": "estimates_number",
	"threshold": "threshold_parameter",
	"norm": "norm_type",
	"p": "p_parameter",
	"seed": "random_seed",
	"result_file": "result_file",
	"variables_file": "variables_file",
	"experiments":
	[
		{
			"name": "data_file_1",
			"template1": "template_1_1",
			"template2": "template_1_2",
			...
			"weight": "weight_1",
		},
		...
		{
			"name": "data_file_N",
			"template1": "template_N_1",
			"template2": "template_N_2",
			...
			"weight": "weight_N",
		}
	],
	"variables":
	[
		{

			"name": "variable_1",
			"minimum": "min_value",
			"maximum": "max_value",
			"precision": "precision_digits",
			"sweeps": "sweeps_number",
			"nbits": "bits_number",
			"step": "step_size",
		},
		...
		{
			"name": "variable_M",
			"minimum": "min_value",
			"maximum": "max_value",
			"precision": "precision_digits",
			"sweeps": "sweeps_number",
			"nbits": "bits_number",
			"step": "step_size",
		}
	]
}
```

SOME EXAMPLES OF INPUT FILES
----------------------------

Example 1
_________

* The simulator program name is: *pivot*
* The syntax is:
> $ ./pivot input_file output_file

* The program to evaluate the objective function is: *compare*
* The syntax is:
> $ ./compare simulated_file data_file result_file

* The calibration is performed with a *sweep brute force algorithm*.

* The experimental data files are:
> 27-48.txt
>
> 42.txt
>
> 52.txt
>
> 100.txt

* Templates to get input files to simulator for each experiment are:
> template1.js
>
> template2.js
>
> template3.js
>
> template4.js

* The variables to calibrate, ranges, precision and sweeps number to perform
are:
> alpha1, [179.70, 180.20], 2, 5
>
> alpha2, [179.30, 179.60], 2, 5
>
> random, [0.00, 0.20], 2, 5
>
> boot-time, [0.0, 3.0], 1, 5

* Then, the number of simulations to run is: 4x5x5x5x5=2500.

* The input file is:

```xml
<?xml version="1.0"?>
<optimize simulator="pivot" evaluator="compare" algorithm="sweep">
    <experiment name="27-48.txt" template1="template1.js"/>
    <experiment name="42.txt" template1="template2.js"/>
    <experiment name="52.txt" template1="template3.js"/>
    <experiment name="100.txt" template1="template4.js"/>
    <variable name="alpha1" minimum="179.70" maximum="180.20" precision="2" nsweeps="5"/>
    <variable name="alpha2" minimum="179.30" maximum="179.60" precision="2" nsweeps="5"/>
    <variable name="random" minimum="0.00" maximum="0.20" precision="2" nsweeps="5"/>
    <variable name="boot-time" minimum="0.0" maximum="3.0" precision="1" nsweeps="5"/>
</optimize>
```

* A template file as *template1.js*:

```json
    {
      "towers" :
      [
        {
          "length"      : 50.11,
          "velocity"    : 0.02738,
          "@variable1@" : @value1@,
          "@variable2@" : @value2@,
          "@variable3@" : @value3@,
          "@variable4@" : @value4@
        },
        {
          "length"    : 50.11,
          "velocity"  : 0.02824,
          "@variable1@" : @value1@,
          "@variable2@" : @value2@,
          "@variable3@" : @value3@,
          "@variable4@" : @value4@
        },
        {
          "length"    : 50.11,
          "velocity"  : 0.03008,
          "@variable1@" : @value1@,
          "@variable2@" : @value2@,
          "@variable3@" : @value3@,
          "@variable4@" : @value4@
        },
        {
          "length"    : 50.11,
          "velocity"  : 0.03753,
          "@variable1@" : @value1@,
          "@variable2@" : @value2@,
          "@variable3@" : @value3@,
          "@variable4@" : @value4@
        }
      ],
      "cycle-time"     : 71.0,
      "plot-time"     : 1.0,
      "comp-time-step": 0.1,
      "active-percent" : 27.48
    }
```

* produces simulator input files to reproduce the experimental data file
*27-48.txt* as:

```json
    {
      "towers" :
      [
        {
          "length"      : 50.11,
          "velocity"    : 0.02738,
          "alpha1" : 179.95,
          "alpha2" : 179.45,
          "random" : 0.10,
          "boot-time" : 1.5
        },
        {
          "length"    : 50.11,
          "velocity"  : 0.02824,
          "alpha1" : 179.95,
          "alpha2" : 179.45,
          "random" : 0.10,
          "boot-time" : 1.5
        },
        {
          "length"    : 50.11,
          "velocity"  : 0.03008,
          "alpha1" : 179.95,
          "alpha2" : 179.45,
          "random" : 0.10,
          "boot-time" : 1.5
        },
        {
          "length"    : 50.11,
          "velocity"  : 0.03753,
          "alpha1" : 179.95,
          "alpha2" : 179.45,
          "random" : 0.10,
          "boot-time" : 1.5
        }
      ],
      "cycle-time"     : 71.0,
      "plot-time"     : 1.0,
      "comp-time-step": 0.1,
      "active-percent" : 27.48
    }
```

Commit message:

Updating Manjaro and OpenSUSE Linux instructions in the README file

3.4.5/README.md, after:

MPCOTool
========

The Multi-Purposes Calibration and Optimization Tool. A software to perform
calibrations or optimizations of empirical parameters.

VERSIONS
--------

* 3.4.5: Stable and recommended version.

AUTHORS
-------

* Javier Burguete Tolosa (jburguete@eead.csic.es)
* Borja Latorre Garcés (borja.latorre@csic.es)

WINDOWS EXECUTABLE FILES
------------------------

This repository contains source and example files with the latest version of 
MPCOTool. Stable versions with executable files and manuals for Microsoft
Windows systems can be downloaded in 
[digital.csic](http://digital.csic.es/handle/10261/148471)

TOOLS AND LIBRARIES REQUIRED TO BUILD THE EXECUTABLE
----------------------------------------------------

* [gcc](https://gcc.gnu.org) or [clang](http://clang.llvm.org) (to compile the
  source code)
* [make](http://www.gnu.org/software/make) (to build the executable file)
* [autoconf](http://www.gnu.org/software/autoconf) (to generate the Makefile in
  different operative systems)
* [automake](http://www.gnu.org/software/automake) (to check the operative
  system)
* [pkg-config](http://www.freedesktop.org/wiki/Software/pkg-config) (to find the
  libraries to compile)
* [gsl](http://www.gnu.org/software/gsl) (to generate random numbers)
* [libxml](http://xmlsoft.org) (to deal with XML files)
* [glib](https://developer.gnome.org/glib) (extended utilities of C to work with
  data, lists, mapped files, regular expressions, using multicores in shared
  memory machines, ...)
* [json-glib](https://github.com/ebassi/json-glib) (to deal with JSON files)
* [genetic](https://github.com/jburguete/genetic) (genetic algorithm)

OPTIONAL TOOLS AND LIBRARIES
----------------------------

* [gettext](http://www.gnu.org/software/gettext) (to work with different
  locales)
* [gtk+3](http://www.gtk.org) (to create the interactive GUI tool)
* [openmpi](http://www.open-mpi.org) or [mpich](http://www.mpich.org) (to run in
  parallelized tasks on multiple computers)
* [doxygen](http://www.stack.nl/~dimitri/doxygen) (standard comments format to
  generate documentation)
* [latex](https://www.latex-project.org/) (to build the PDF manuals)

FILES
-----

The source code has to have the following files:
* 3.4.5/configure.ac: configure generator.
* 3.4.5/Makefile.in: Makefile generator.
* 3.4.5/config.h.in: config header generator.
* 3.4.5/mpcotool.c: main source code.
* 3.4.5/mpcotool.h: main header code.
* 3.4.5/mpcotool.ico: icon file.
* 3.4.5/interface.h: interface header code.
* 3.4.5/build: script to build all.
* 3.4.5/logo.png: logo figure.
* 3.4.5/Doxyfile: configuration file to generate doxygen documentation.
* TODO: tasks to do.
* README.md: this file.
* license.md: license file.
* tests/testX/\*: several tests to check the program working.
* locales/\*/LC\_MESSAGES/mpcotool.po: translation files.
* manuals/\*.eps: manual figures in EPS format.
* manuals/\*.png: manual figures in PNG format.
* manuals/\*.tex: documentation source files.
* applications/\*/\*: several practical application cases.
* check\_errors/\*.xml: several mistaken files to check error handling.

BUILDING INSTRUCTIONS
---------------------

This software has been built and tested in the following operative systems.
Probably, it can be built in other systems, distributions, or versions but it
has not been tested.

Debian 9 (Linux, kFreeBSD or Hurd)
__________________________________
DragonFly BSD 5.2
_________________
Dyson Illumos
_____________
FreeBSD 11.2
____________
Linux Mint DE 2
_______________
Manjaro Linux
_____________
Xubuntu Linux 18.10
___________________

1. Download the latest [genetic](https://github.com/jburguete/genetic) doing on
a terminal:
> $ git clone https://github.com/jburguete/genetic.git

2. Download this repository:
> $ git clone https://github.com/jburguete/mpcotool.git

3. Link the latest genetic version to genetic:
> $ cd mpcotool/3.4.5
>
> $ ln -s ../../genetic/2.2.2 genetic
> 
> $ ln -s genetic/libgenetic.so

  or in Windows systems:
> $ ln -s genetic/libgenetic.dll

4. Build doing on a terminal:
> $ ./build

Fedora Linux 29
_______________

1. In order to use OpenMPI compilation do in a terminal (in 64 bits version):
> $ export PATH=$PATH:/usr/lib64/openmpi/bin

2. Then, follow steps 1 to 4 of the previous Debian 9 section.

Microsoft Windows 7
___________________
Microsoft Windows 10
____________________

1. Install [MSYS2](http://sourceforge.net/projects/msys2) and the required
libraries and utilities. You can follow detailed instructions in
[install-unix](https://github.com/jburguete/install-unix/blob/master/tutorial.pdf)

2. Then, in a MSYS2 terminal, follow steps 1 to 4 of the previous Debian 9
section.

3. Optional Windows binary package can be built doing in the terminal:
> $ make windist

NetBSD 7.0
__________

1. MPI does not work. Follow steps 1 to 3 of the previous Debian 9 section and
do in the terminal:
> $ CC=/usr/pkg/gcc5/bin/gcc ./build

OpenBSD 6.4
___________

1. Select adequate versions:
> $ export AUTOCONF_VERSION=2.69 AUTOMAKE_VERSION=1.16

2. Then, in a terminal, follow steps 1 to 4 of the previous Debian 9 section.

OpenIndiana Hipster
___________________

1. In order to use OpenMPI compilation do in a terminal:
> $ export PATH=/usr/lib/openmpi/gcc/bin:$PATH

2. Then, follow steps 1 to 4 of the previous Debian 9 section.

OpenSUSE Linux Leap
___________________

1. In order to use OpenMPI compilation in 64 bits version do in a terminal
(OpenMPI configure script does not work in last OpenSUSE versions then does not
apply this step):
> $ export PATH=/usr/lib64/mpi/gcc/openmpi/bin:$PATH

2. Then, follow steps 1 to 4 of the previous Debian 9 section.

Building no-GUI version on servers
__________________________________

On servers or clusters, where no-GUI with MPI parallelization is desirable,
replace the 4th step of the previous Debian 9 section by:
> $ ./build\_with\_mpi
 
Linking as an external library
______________________________

MPCOTool can also be used as an external library:

1. First copy the dynamic libraries (libmpcotool.so and libgenetic.so on Unix 
  systems or libmpcotool.dll and libgenetic.dll on Windows systems) to your 
  program directory.

2. Include the function header in your source code:
> extern int mpcotool (int argn, char **argc);

3. Build the executable file with the linker and compiler flags:
> $ gcc -L. -Wl,-rpath=. -lmpcotool -lgenetic ...
> \`pkg-config --cflags --libs gsl glib-2.0 json-glib-1.0 ...\'

4. Calling to this function is equivalent to command line order (see next 
  chapter USER INSTRUCTIONS):
  * argn: number of arguments
  * argc[0]: "mpcotool"
  * argc[1]: first command line argument.

  ...

  * argc[argn-1]: last argument.

MAKING MANUALS INSTRUCTIONS
---------------------------

On UNIX type systems you need [texlive](https://www.tug.org/texlive) installed.
On Windows systems you need [MiKTeX](http://miktex.org). In order to compile the
manuals you can type on a terminal:
> $ make manuals

MAKING TESTS INSTRUCTIONS
-------------------------

In order to build the tests follow the next instructions:

1. Link some tests that needs genetic library doing in a terminal (assuming that
you are in the directory mpcotool/3.4.5):
> $ cd ../tests/test2
>
> $ ln -s ../../../genetic/2.2.2 genetic
>
> $ ln -s genetic/libgenetic.so (or .dll on Windows systems)
>
> $ cd ../test3
>
> $ ln -s ../../../genetic/2.2.2 genetic
>
> $ ln -s genetic/libgenetic.so (or .dll on Windows systems)
>
> $ cd ../test4
>
> $ ln -s ../../../genetic/2.2.2 genetic
>
> $ ln -s genetic/libgenetic.so (or .dll on Windows systems)

2. Build all tests doing in the same terminal:
> $ cd ../../3.4.5
>
> $ make tests

USER INSTRUCTIONS
-----------------

Optional arguments are typed in square brackets.

* Command line in sequential mode (where X is the number of threads to execute
  and S is a seed for the pseudo-random numbers generator):
> $ ./mpcotoolbin [-nthreads X] [-seed S] input\_file.xml [result\_file]
> [variables\_file]

* Command line in parallelized mode (where X is the number of threads to
  open for every node and S is a seed for the pseudo-random numbers generator):
> $ mpirun [MPI options] ./mpcotoolbin [-nthreads X] [-seed S] input\_file.xml
> [result\_file] [variables\_file]

* The syntax of the simulator has to be:
> $ ./simulator\_name input\_file\_1 [input\_file\_2] [input\_file\_3] [input\_file\_4]
> output\_file

* The syntax of the program to evaluate the objetive function has to be (where
  the first data in the results file has to be the objective function value):
> $ ./evaluator\_name simulated\_file data\_file results\_file

* On UNIX type systems the GUI application can be open doing on a terminal:
> $ ./mpcotool

INPUT FILE FORMAT
-----------------

The format of the main input file is as:

```xml
<?xml version="1.0"?>
<optimize simulator="simulator_name" evaluator="evaluator_name" algorithm="algorithm_type" nsimulations="simulations_number" niterations="iterations_number" tolerance="tolerance_value" nbest="best_number" npopulation="population_number" ngenerations="generations_number" mutation="mutation_ratio" reproduction="reproduction_ratio" adaptation="adaptation_ratio" direction="direction_search_type" nsteps="steps_number" relaxation="relaxation_parameter" nestimates="estimates_number" threshold="threshold_parameter" norm="norm_type" p="p_parameter" seed="random_seed" result_file="result_file" variables_file="variables_file">
    <experiment name="data_file_1" template1="template_1_1" template2="template_1_2" ... weight="weight_1"/>
    ...
    <experiment name="data_file_N" template1="template_N_1" template2="template_N_2" ... weight="weight_N"/>
    <variable name="variable_1" minimum="min_value" maximum="max_value" precision="precision_digits" sweeps="sweeps_number" nbits="bits_number" step="step_size"/>
    ...
    <variable name="variable_M" minimum="min_value" maximum="max_value" precision="precision_digits" sweeps="sweeps_number" nbits="bits_number" step="step_size"/>
</optimize>
```

with:

* **simulator**: simulator executable file name.
* **evaluator**: optional. When needed is the evaluator executable file name.
* **seed**: optional. Seed of the pseudo-random numbers generator (default value
  is 7007).
* **result\_file**: optional. It is the name of the optime result file (default 
  name is "result").
* **variables\_file**: optional. It is the name of all simulated variables file
  (default name is "variables").
* **precision**: optional, defined for each variable. Number of precision digits
  to evaluate the variable. 0 apply for integer numbers (default value is 14).
* **weight**: optional, defined for each experiment. Multiplies the objective
  value obtained for each experiment in the final objective function value
  (default value is 1).
* **threshold**: optional, to stop the simulations if objective function value
  less than the threshold is obtained (default value is 0).
* **algorithm**: optimization algorithm type.
* **norm**: error norm type.

Implemented algorithms are:

* **sweep**: Sweep brute force algorithm. It requires for each variable:
  * *sweeps*: number of sweeps to generate for each variable in every
    experiment. 

    The total number of simulations to run is:
> (number of experiments) x (variable 1 number of sweeps) x ... x
> (variable n number of sweeps) x (number of iterations)

* **Monte-Carlo**: Monte-Carlo brute force algorithm. It requires on calibrate:
  * *nsimulations*: number of simulations to run in every experiment.

    The total number of simulations to run is:
> (number of experiments) x (number of simulations) x (number of iterations)

* Both brute force algorithms can be iterated to improve convergence by using
  the following parameters:
  * *nbest*: number of best simulations to calculate convergence interval on
    next iteration (default 1).
  * *tolerance*: tolerance parameter to increase convergence interval (default
    0).
  * *niterations*: number of iterations (default 1).

     It multiplies the total number of simulations:
> x (number of iterations)

* Moreover, both brute force algorithms can be coupled with a direction search
  method by using:
  * *direction*: method to estimate the optimal direction. Two options are
    currently available:
    * coordinates: coordinates descent method.

      It increases the total number of simulations by:
> (number of experiments) x (number of iterations) x (number of steps) x 2
> x (number of variables)
    * random: random method. It requires:
    * nestimates: number of random checks to estimate the optimal direction.

      It increases the total number of simulations by:
> (number of experiments) x (number of iterations) x (number of steps)
> x (number of estimates)

  Both methods require also:
    * nsteps: number of steps to perform the direction search method,
    * relaxation: relaxation parameter,

  and for each variable:
    * step: initial step size for the direction search method.

* **genetic**: Genetic algorithm. It requires the following parameters:
  * *npopulation*: number of population.
  * *ngenerations*: number of generations.
  * *mutation*: mutation ratio.
  * *reproduction*: reproduction ratio.
  * *adaptation*: adaptation ratio.

  and for each variable:

  * *nbits*: number of bits to encode each variable.

  The total number of simulations to run is:
> (number of experiments) x (npopulation) x [1 + (ngenerations - 1)
> x (mutation + reproduction + adaptation)]

Implemented error noms are:

* **euclidian**: Euclidian norm.
* **maximum**: maximum norm.
* **p**: p-norm. It requires the parameter:
  * *p*: p exponent.
* **taxicab**: Taxicab norm.

Alternatively, the input file can be also written in JSON format as:

```json
{
	"simulator": "simulator_name",
	"evaluator": "evaluator_name",
	"algorithm": "algorithm_type",
	"nsimulations": "simulations_number",
	"niterations": "iterations_number",
	"tolerance": "tolerance_value",
	"nbest": "best_number",
	"npopulation": "population_number",
	"ngenerations": "generations_number",
	"mutation": "mutation_ratio",
	"reproduction": "reproduction_ratio",
	"adaptation": "adaptation_ratio",
	"direction": "direction_search_type",
	"nsteps": "steps_number",
	"relaxation": "relaxation_parameter",
	"nestimates": "estimates_number",
	"threshold": "threshold_parameter",
	"norm": "norm_type",
	"p": "p_parameter",
	"seed": "random_seed",
	"result_file": "result_file",
	"variables_file": "variables_file",
	"experiments":
	[
		{
			"name": "data_file_1",
			"template1": "template_1_1",
			"template2": "template_1_2",
			...
			"weight": "weight_1",
		},
		...
		{
			"name": "data_file_N",
			"template1": "template_N_1",
			"template2": "template_N_2",
			...
			"weight": "weight_N",
		}
	],
	"variables":
	[
		{

			"name": "variable_1",
			"minimum": "min_value",
			"maximum": "max_value",
			"precision": "precision_digits",
			"sweeps": "sweeps_number",
			"nbits": "bits_number",
			"step": "step_size",
		},
		...
		{
			"name": "variable_M",
			"minimum": "min_value",
			"maximum": "max_value",
			"precision": "precision_digits",
			"sweeps": "sweeps_number",
			"nbits": "bits_number",
			"step": "step_size",
		}
	]
}
```

SOME EXAMPLES OF INPUT FILES
----------------------------

Example 1
_________

* The simulator program name is: *pivot*
* The syntax is:
> $ ./pivot input_file output_file

* The program to evaluate the objective function is: *compare*
* The syntax is:
> $ ./compare simulated_file data_file result_file

* The calibration is performed with a *sweep brute force algorithm*.

* The experimental data files are:
> 27-48.txt
>
> 42.txt
>
> 52.txt
>
> 100.txt

* Templates to get input files to simulator for each experiment are:
> template1.js
>
> template2.js
>
> template3.js
>
> template4.js

* The variables to calibrate, ranges, precision and sweeps number to perform
are:
> alpha1, [179.70, 180.20], 2, 5
>
> alpha2, [179.30, 179.60], 2, 5
>
> random, [0.00, 0.20], 2, 5
>
> boot-time, [0.0, 3.0], 1, 5

* Then, the number of simulations to run is: 4x5x5x5x5=2500.

* The input file is:

```xml
<?xml version="1.0"?>
<optimize simulator="pivot" evaluator="compare" algorithm="sweep">
    <experiment name="27-48.txt" template1="template1.js"/>
    <experiment name="42.txt" template1="template2.js"/>
    <experiment name="52.txt" template1="template3.js"/>
    <experiment name="100.txt" template1="template4.js"/>
    <variable name="alpha1" minimum="179.70" maximum="180.20" precision="2" nsweeps="5"/>
    <variable name="alpha2" minimum="179.30" maximum="179.60" precision="2" nsweeps="5"/>
    <variable name="random" minimum="0.00" maximum="0.20" precision="2" nsweeps="5"/>
    <variable name="boot-time" minimum="0.0" maximum="3.0" precision="1" nsweeps="5"/>
</optimize>
```

* A template file as *template1.js*:

```json
    {
      "towers" :
      [
        {
          "length"      : 50.11,
          "velocity"    : 0.02738,
          "@variable1@" : @value1@,
          "@variable2@" : @value2@,
          "@variable3@" : @value3@,
          "@variable4@" : @value4@
        },
        {
          "length"    : 50.11,
          "velocity"  : 0.02824,
          "@variable1@" : @value1@,
          "@variable2@" : @value2@,
          "@variable3@" : @value3@,
          "@variable4@" : @value4@
        },
        {
          "length"    : 50.11,
          "velocity"  : 0.03008,
          "@variable1@" : @value1@,
          "@variable2@" : @value2@,
          "@variable3@" : @value3@,
          "@variable4@" : @value4@
        },
        {
          "length"    : 50.11,
          "velocity"  : 0.03753,
          "@variable1@" : @value1@,
          "@variable2@" : @value2@,
          "@variable3@" : @value3@,
          "@variable4@" : @value4@
        }
      ],
      "cycle-time"     : 71.0,
      "plot-time"     : 1.0,
      "comp-time-step": 0.1,
      "active-percent" : 27.48
    }
```

* produces simulator input files to reproduce the experimental data file
*27-48.txt* as:

```json
    {
      "towers" :
      [
        {
          "length"      : 50.11,
          "velocity"    : 0.02738,
          "alpha1" : 179.95,
          "alpha2" : 179.45,
          "random" : 0.10,
          "boot-time" : 1.5
        },
        {
          "length"    : 50.11,
          "velocity"  : 0.02824,
          "alpha1" : 179.95,
          "alpha2" : 179.45,
          "random" : 0.10,
          "boot-time" : 1.5
        },
        {
          "length"    : 50.11,
          "velocity"  : 0.03008,
          "alpha1" : 179.95,
          "alpha2" : 179.45,
          "random" : 0.10,
          "boot-time" : 1.5
        },
        {
          "length"    : 50.11,
          "velocity"  : 0.03753,
          "alpha1" : 179.95,
          "alpha2" : 179.45,
          "random" : 0.10,
          "boot-time" : 1.5
        }
      ],
      "cycle-time"     : 71.0,
      "plot-time"     : 1.0,
      "comp-time-step": 0.1,
      "active-percent" : 27.48
    }
```
